Okay.
Enough with all this JBoss and J2E crap.
Finally a WebObjects session.
[Transcript missing]
Good afternoon, good afternoon,
early evening.
My name is Brian Fitzpatrick and
I'm here with Kenny Leung and
David Neumann to talk a little bit
about reusable components in WebObjects.
Now,
there's a lot of different things that
are reusable about WebObjects and in fact
even reusable about this presentation.
So, you know,
we'll talk about some things
like some reusable slides.
You know, every presentation I've done
on WebObjects for the last four
years has had this slide in it.
Unfortunately, it has nothing to do
with reusable components,
but they look great.
I mean, look at the stuff you
can do with WebObjects.
This is a really nice
slide from last year,
WWC 2002.
So this is another reusable slide.
But we'd like to move on
to some reusable jokes.
Anybody who caught my presentation
last year on optimizing WebObjects?
Anybody?
You still left?
Still using WebObjects?
We had a few jokes here.
We have a couple questions.
This is a Q&A.
So to sort of get
everybody paying attention,
waking up, I'm going to put a question up
there and we're going to put
up a couple different answers.
When you see the answer that
you think is the correct answer,
I want to hear you clap.
Exactly.
Is that your rest pass?
No?
Okay.
So the first question.
What's the longest method
name in WebObjects?
Now start clapping to the answer
because these guys have prizes
which are lovely WebObjects hats.
Longest method name in WebObjects
is it add objects to both
sides of relationship with key.
Oh, it gets better.
It gets much better.
Is it database context?
We'll run login panel to
open database channel.
That's a delegate,
so it's kind of cheating, isn't it?
Yeah, it's kind of cheating.
Yeah, well.
But we've got this one.
Adaptive channels should construct
stored procedure return values.
Nobody thinks that's a long...
You see empty space down there.
You're expecting
something a little bigger?
We do have one more that's a little bit
too long to fit onto this one screen.
So, anyway.
So what is the most popular
WebObjects movie this summer?
We have a lot of movies out this summer.
- I Need Nemo.
- Oh, come on.
We have the NS Matrix Reloaded.
We have Xcode 2, Code United.
That was a popular one.
I don't hear any clapping.
NSD Bugrats?
Did anybody catch that?
Terminate Application 3,
the rise of the virtual machine?
Or is it finding EO?
Okay.
What's the best name for
the release notes to get
people to actually read them?
Is it "Don't Read Me"? "Nothing to
See Here"? "EOEditingContext.java"?
[Transcript missing]
Okay.
We got all that out of the way now.
Now we're going to talk about
actual reusable components.
We're going to talk about a
number of different things.
But the first thing I want to point out
is that this is an advanced session.
A lot of people in the past have
asked for an advanced session.
They want a session where we can
talk about doing some stuff with
WebObjects that you don't normally see
or figure out the first six months,
a year or two using WebObjects.
So the first thing we're going
to talk about is commitment.
Okay, when designing reusable components,
if EOF is all about relationships
and reusable components are
about commitment and bindings,
you should strive for... Am I missing
something in the background here?
Okay.
You should strive for loose
bindings and low commitment.
What do you mean by commitment?
We mean frameworks to include.
You want to--
Is there something funny going on here?
What am I missing here?
Mostly men in this room.
Mostly men in this room?
Oh, well, my wife's out here somewhere.
Commitment.
Frameworks to include.
Reusable components.
If you really want people to
reuse your components or you want
to reuse your own components,
you want to have as little
commitment as possible.
You want to use the least
amount of frameworks to include.
You want to have the least amount of
interfaces and the least amount of
bindings that are absolutely necessary.
So if you have a component that
someone's going to drag into their
other component and bind up to that,
you may have 5, 10,
20 different bindings,
but maybe only one or
two of them are required.
Or it only works with enterprise objects.
Maybe that's a requirement
of your component.
Maybe you can just get
by with key value coding.
So that's what the most
important thing is,
is about commitment and how
to deal with the bindings.
So we're going to do a
little introduction now,
and then Kenny's going to come on and
talk about bindings and how to use
bindings in the most efficient manner and
smart bindings and that sort of thing.
Dave's going to come on and
talk about component content.
I'll come back and I'm going to
talk about streaming HTTP requests.
Boy, we've got something great there.
Then we've got some different tips and
tricks and a section we like to call Dr.
Evil, which is going to talk about some
things that you can do with WebObjects
and the WebObjects framework,
but a little on the edge.
And then finally,
we have a few examples to show
you of reusable components.
So reusable components are
WebObjects GUI widgets.
If you're coming from Cocoa Land,
you've used Interface Builder,
you've got your pallets of
different things you can use.
In WebObjects,
you've got dynamic elements.
Reusable components involve
taking these dynamic elements,
composing them,
modifying them to make more
interesting reusable components that
you can reuse either within your
project or from project to project.
Reusable components are subclass
as a rule of will component.
And an important distinction to
make is there's no difference
between a small reusable component,
that is anywhere from one character,
to the size of an entire page.
In fact,
when most people begin using WebObjects,
most of their components
are entire pages.
You can edit your reusable
components in WebObjects Builder.
You can also use your
favorite text editor,
Emacs, VI, Cat, Stickies,
as Steve Hayman has
pointed out in the past.
We talk about child components
and parent components.
When a component is
within another component,
that is referred to as
the child component.
The component that contains that
component is referred to as the parent.
So that's a little
terminology to get straight.
Now, there's no limit to how deep
components can be nested.
They can be arbitrarily deep.
You can have three components deep.
You can go 40, 50.
But as you get deeper and deeper,
there's a performance price to be paid.
And you would use your reusable
components just the same way
that you would use WebObjects.
Well, string, well, hyperlink.
And you maybe use my component,
my string, or whatnot.
There's a number of different
design patterns that you're all
familiar with when writing software.
And I'm going to talk just briefly about
some design patterns for using components
in the WebObjects component model.
One thing is templates,
which there's a number of different
ways to deal with templates.
You know that your WebObjects
components have three major parts,
the Java file, the bindings file,
and the HTML file.
Now, the Java file,
you can keep the same.
If you create a component and
include that into your project
or your other component,
but if you need the view
layer to look different,
if you need the template part,
the HTML markup to look differently,
what you might want to do is
either subclass that component and
create a new WAD and HTML file,
or you can even,
there are ways to dynamically replace
the WAD and HTML file in your components.
Another thing, another design pattern,
which I'm going to talk
a little more about,
is mini components.
Now, I've done a lot of different
WebObjects projects,
and one of the favorite things
that I've used is mini components.
Now, if you put everything in a very
complex page into one component,
not only do you wind up with an
HTML file this big and a million
bindings and a whole heap of Java,
which is a little harder
to deal with and maintain,
but you also wind up with
everything's kind of mooshed together.
So what you start doing,
one of the first steps you do is
you start dividing things out.
One of the first things people
do is a header and a footer.
And then they'll,
or maybe they'll wrap their
page in a header and a footer.
People will then create a menu
bar or a navigation bar component,
different type of things.
So mini components is a pattern
where you create bunches of different
components and compose them.
So it could also be called
component composition.
So if you look up here on the screen,
you'll see we have a screenshot
of a WebObjects application,
which has a navigation
bar at the very top,
and it has a QuickTime VR,
or in this case,
it's an image map you can click on.
So you can go look at a VR.
And we've got different pop-up menus.
Choose a country, choose a city,
and then we've got a search box,
and then below that,
we also have an image map,
a clickable image map of the
world and another search box.
Now looking at this,
how many components would you think on?
Who thinks there's one to
five components on this page?
Anyone?
No one?
Five to ten?
Five to ten components.
Anyone for ten to fifteen?
Okay.
We have actually, click,
about ten to fifteen components.
And that isn't included.
It's included the wrapper component
of the HTML header and footer,
whatever or not.
So including all these components,
binding them together,
provides you a very powerful way
of using WebObjects components.
And a lot of these
components are reusable,
if not necessarily from one
application to the next,
definitely within this
application and other sections.
So it's something to think about.
So now to talk about bindings,
I'm going to introduce Kenny Leung from,
oh, you know, it's just drawing a blank.
Who are you?
Banzai Research Institute.
Banzai Research Institute in
Southern California.
Thanks, Fitz.
So bindings are really the
heart of reusable components.
They're the mechanism by
which reusable components
communicate with their parents.
You can call them arguments to
your reusable component or the
API to your reusable component.
And like all API,
you should try to make them
lightweight and simple.
We talk about bindings being pulled into
the child or pushed into the parent,
the child being the reusable component,
the parent being whatever it
is that you're using it in.
The child is in full control
of pulling and pushing of the
bindings and not the parent.
The parent really can't
do anything about that.
And I've seen even experienced
developers neglect this last point.
You should fill out the API for
your components that way.
So, in WebObjects Builder,
that's the little puzzle
piece in the toolbar.
And when you push it,
what you get is a little
panel that pops up.
And you can basically document
the bindings that your
reusable component requires.
Not only that,
but you can make it so that --
mark some of them as required,
make it so that if one is bound,
then the other -- another
one must be bound,
or if one is bound,
then another one can't be bound.
So it really gives you --
gives the person using it a lot
of clues as to how to do it,
good documentation without their having
to remember what all the bindings are,
especially if you've got a big
one that has a ton of bindings.
And I've got a little request to
the WAB team to actually allow
us to put help in there as well.
There are many ways of handling bindings.
You see from auto synchronization
to all kinds of stuff,
more than we can fit on the page here.
Unfortunately,
there's not one way we can say
is better than all the rest,
except to say that auto
synchronization is probably not a
good idea for reusable components.
Basically, the best thing to do is learn
how they all work and apply them
properly in the right situation.
and in the interest of time
I'm not going to go through all
these so don't be surprised if
we skip a couple along the way.
So what is auto synchronization?
It's WebObjects mechanism for
automatically pushing and pulling
the bindings at the appropriate times
within the request response loop.
Bindings are pulled at the beginning
and end of the three phases
of the request response loop,
take values from request,
invoke action for request,
and append to response.
They're actually pulled at the
beginning of take values from request,
pushed at the end of
take values from request,
and likewise in the other two phases.
It's the WebObjects default,
but it's important to note
that it doesn't preclude,
if you have it turned on,
it doesn't preclude
manual synchronization.
So you have these six points where
things get synchronized for you.
But if you need to do it at some other
point within your request response loop,
you can still call value for binding,
set value for binding.
It doesn't interfere one way or the
other with the getting of binding values.
And in the grand tradition of extra long,
gratuitously long method names,
you can override synchronizes variables
with bindings to return false in your
reusable component to go fully manual.
Now, why is auto synchronization
undesirable for reusable components?
One thing is it's really magical.
For people first coming into WebObjects,
they're like,
How does this work?
How does it know exactly when
to stuff values into and out
of my reusable components?
So by doing all the handling
of bindings yourself,
you know exactly when they happen,
where it's going on,
and it takes all the mystery out of it,
which I think is a good thing.
Another reason is it happens
more often than necessary.
If you add it all up,
it's six times per component
for every request response loop,
and that can really add up.
For display only components,
you can usually get away with just
one pull per request response loop,
and there may be a lot of bindings that,
depending on the values
of other bindings,
that you'll never grab,
so you can get away with just not doing
any synchronization on those bindings.
The other thing is you may have
to worry about side effects
on your accessor methods.
You know,
if you increment something inside an
accessor method or something that you
really only expected to get called
once during a request response loop,
now it gets called three times.
So it's just more stuff
for you to worry about.
The third and probably the most
important bit here is that the
order in which bindings are pushed
and pulled is indeterminate.
So if you have some kind of behavior
or value that actually depends
on the values of two bindings,
like if binding one is null
and binding two has a value,
or if binding two is null
and binding one has a value,
you do something.
When your accessor
method gets called for,
say, binding two,
you can't be sure that the
value for binding one has the
right value at that point.
So I'm going to go on and talk about
accessor methods with cache as one of
the techniques for handling bindings.
If you look at the examples
that come with WebObjects,
you'll see that a lot of
them use this technique.
And it's not rocket science.
It's very simple.
We use caches to improve performance,
and we flush the caches at the
beginning of a pending response.
Now, there's a good reason for
doing it at that point,
but we're not going to get into
Take a look at a little code example.
I'm going to try to use
my wimpy little laser.
I don't know if you can see it here.
We're sharks with lasers coming
off their heads when you need them.
So...
Here it's very simple.
We just say if binding equals null,
then binding equals value
for binding binding.
That's how we return the binding.
In the set binding method,
we say set value for binding to push
the value back up to the parent.
And in the ped response,
to empty the cache,
we just say binding equals null.
As an extension to this,
we can have default values for bindings.
This is really good in keeping with
the low commitment part of philosophy.
If the component itself
provides a default value,
it's one less thing that the
consumer needs to provide.
And again, it's very simple.
We just say if after checking --
after doing value for binding,
we check again to see
if the binding is null.
And if it is null,
we just do set binding.
And as in the previous example,
set binding will just push
our default value back up
to the parent if it's bound,
which is --
Which is a good thing, you know,
the parent will need to
know what that value is.
Next,
we'll talk about page-level bindings.
The typical way in which we
see this is you've created
a beautiful input component.
It has a flag on it.
You can have it either in a
display mode or editable mode,
and you want to drop a whole
bunch of these things into a page.
And you'd like to control them all by
just throwing one switch on the page.
But, you know,
it becomes a pain to bind up editable
to all of these little components.
And, you know, it's error prone.
It's another extra thing to do.
And if you nest them
inside other components,
you're going to have to propagate
that editable flag all the way down.
It's much more convenient to
just have the component crawl up
to the page that it's in and ask
for the editable flag itself,
a little implicit thing that
it automatically knows about.
We can still allow manual
overrides by explicitly providing
a binding to one of these.
So if you want, for instance, to have,
for whatever reason,
to have one of the fields not
be editable while the rest are,
you can easily control that.
Similarly,
you can have session and application
level bindings where a component
can just go to the session or the
application for a flag or some
value and figure out what to do.
Looking at our example here,
so we check if we have a certain
binding by using hasBinding,
and if we have the binding,
we return the value for binding.
This is our manual override.
And then if we don't,
we just return root value for key
for the flag that we're looking for.
Now, root is just a little recursive
method I'm not going to show
here that just crawls up,
calls parent continually
until it gets to the top.
and again with the low
commitment philosophy,
we catch NSK valid coding unknown
key exception so that if the
page we're embedded in doesn't
actually implement editable,
everything is still cool
and we just keep on going.
And I'm going to turn it over to
Dave to talk about component content.
Dave, you want to start?
Okay,
before component content came around,
there was this thing called
the switch component.
And the switch component existed to
allow you to create reusable components
that had a region of dynamic content,
something that you as a component
designer didn't provide and
you wanted the consumer to be
able to provide this thing.
It had and still exists,
I shouldn't say had, it has some...
The WebObjects component
architecture is a complex design
that requires the existence of
some other reusable components.
If you have a page and you use
this reusable component and you
want to use some customized stuff,
you've got to have this other
component around to switch into it.
Also, your switch component
defines a set of bindings.
Your reusable component design
says I have binding type A,
B, C, and D.
That means any component that
you provide to customize,
to switch in,
also has to adhere to those limitations.
So later on in the history of WebObjects,
something called component
content came around,
and it let the parent define anything
it wanted right there in the template.
And there was no constraint
on the dynamic area.
You could do anything you wanted,
and there wasn't even the need
for passing bindings because
the customized stuff was defined
right in the parent directly.
Now, having said that,
dissing the switch component,
let me just say that it is actually
still useful for certain things.
You might want a component inside
a framework to express itself in
a certain limited number of ways,
and you want to just get some type
of polymorphic effect where you
just have certain discrete kinds of
components that do one particular
thing and do it in that particular
way just inside your framework.
There's also the situation where
you created a reusable component
that had this dynamic capability
and you didn't want the consumer
to have to customize anything.
To them, you wanted it just to
look like a black box.
And the other one that's still
relevant today is the need to
have more than one dynamic region.
And it's to address that one that
I want to introduce this concept
called multiple component content.
I'd imagine anyone who's used real
component content has probably wanted to
have more than one of these things that
they could put in there so the parent
could define more than one template,
and in which to customize
the reusable component.
And this concept I'm calling
multiple component content
removes this type of constraint.
And in an example app that we'll
be demoing in parts and that
you'll be able to download,
there's a source for a couple dynamic
elements that implement this concept.
And one's called RC component
content and the other's RC template.
So I wanted to give you an example
of where this might come in handy.
On the screen here,
we've got a page template.
Almost every WebObjects application
tends to have something like this.
And the typical way this would be
implemented today would be you'd have
a component content for the body,
and you might switch components
for the header and for the menu.
And what I'm saying here with
multiple component content,
the parent page that incorporated
this template reusable component could
define all three of those regions
right there inside the parent itself.
So what does this look like
from a development perspective?
I've got on here the definitions
for a reusable component.
We've got the component.html
and the component.wadfile.
And this is a trivial example,
but I just want to
illustrate what's going on.
So I've got a table
and I've got two cells.
One's got a top template and
one's got a bottom template.
And the reusable component.wadfile,
the declaration file, has instead of one
will component content,
it has two RC component contents.
And there's one new thing here.
Will component content
didn't have a name,
but multiple component content does.
In this case,
I've named the first one top template
and the other one bottom template.
And what this looks like to the consumer,
the parent,
they put one of these reusable
components on the page.
And you may recall for
will component content,
I don't need the nested elements.
That you see here.
There's only one element,
so I don't need one nested
template to define it.
Anything between the opening and closing
tags of the reusable component is
enough to define the customized content.
But in this case,
we've got more than one.
So in this example,
you see two things up there.
But imagine there were four
or five or more defined.
And in the example below,
you see in the parent.wadfile,
we've got two RC templates.
And they have a template name of
top template and bottom template.
And this is how your parent
tells the reusable component,
I want this content to go here and
I want this content to go there.
Okay.
So, let's go to demo.
I'm going to not show so
much as just introduce.
This is the example that you'll be able
to download that has the example code.
This is an example of a page
template that defines a look.
It's a complex formatted table.
And I've got content here in the
header and in the left and in the body
that is all defined in the parent.
The table itself,
everything you see on the outline
with this sort of Aqua effect
is in the reusable component.
And to better identify what is dynamic
in terms of the component and the page,
let me show you this one.
with the same reusable
component but different content
inside both of the cells.
There's also a notion of what
this allows you to implement
something or more easily implement
a concept I call view inheritance.
Don't have time to talk about this
whole sort of abstract thing now,
but maybe we can talk about
it afterwards or in the Q&A.
There's also the notion of you
can have conditional content.
This is an example of a reusable
component that has two templates and the
reusable component decides to only show
one of them based on some conditional.
And there's some other examples
here that use component content,
but I just sort of wanted to give
you a little overview of where
it's been used and illustrated
its uses inside the example here.
Back to the slides.
Thank you.
And just to sort of review what's
in multiple component content,
why you might like this,
it allows you to do away
with a switch component,
so you can have just your parent,
you can have your three
regions of dynamic content,
and you're pretty much done.
There's no other
components that are needed,
and therefore you get less
complexity in this type of solution.
So, let me move on to streaming
requests and responses,
where Brian will come up
and take care of this area.
Thanks, Dave.
So before I start talking about
streaming request and responses,
who in this room has used a
non-streaming WoW file upload and
run out of memory in their machine?
Anyone?
Who's asked for this streaming
adapter for the last few years?
I've been one of the
people asking for this,
okay?
Yeah, Francois.
Not you, Francois.
We now have streaming file uploads,
and it's all thanks to
Carl Su and Francois Jouel.
Let's give them a big hand, please.
All these guys.
Carl almost did himself physically
harm by working so hard on this.
He worked hours and hours and hours.
His poor hands.
We now have streaming
requests and responses.
For those of you who are
relatively new to WebObjects,
in the past,
if someone uploaded a file to
your WebObjects application,
that was pretty big.
Let's say someone uploaded a 50
megabyte file into your application.
The WebObjects adapter in the
web server would suck it all in,
and it would shift it over to
your WebObjects application,
which would have a copy of this 50
megabyte file in its request object.
And then,
when it went through and did take values,
it would create another copy of this
50 megabyte file for you to just
muck about with or do what you wish,
which you could then shoot to a file,
a database, another server,
that sort of thing.
With this going on,
you pretty quickly ran out of memory,
garbage collection or not.
So now we have streaming
requests and responses.
When someone uploads,
you can use a reusable component.
Now,
this is a component that is way reusable.
We'll file upload.
Depending on what you bind to it,
you can... You can get the standard
no streaming WebObjects file upload.
Bind to the data binding.
You get just what you used to have,
which is fine for a lot
of different things.
If you know people are only going
to be uploading small objects or
small files and that sort of thing.
You can use the stream
to file path binding,
which allows you to just
simply specify a path,
and the file will get shot off to that.
You can use the output stream
binding or the input stream binding.
So there's been some confusion
about which one does what.
So we'll start off talking
about stream to file path.
Actually, I believe there's an issue or
two with stream to file path,
but that's being worked on right now.
You provide a path.
WebObjects streams the data to it.
It's just that simple.
Come up with a simple Java line string,
and your data is going to wind up there.
You don't have to create
any stream objects.
You just come up with a file name.
You can also set the overwrite binding
if you want to make sure that the user
doesn't overwrite an existing file.
And the other neat thing
about this is that,
you know, how Kenny said earlier
that you don't know,
it's nondeterministic,
which order the bindings in a
particular component are filled out.
However, this makes sure that the file
name binding is set first for you
so that you can take a look at
that binding and perhaps come up
with a different output stream,
I'm sorry, a different file path to
write to based on that.
Input stream versus output stream.
So output stream is the easiest way to
take advantage of streaming requests.
The data is streamed for
you during take values.
You have to, by the time your action
gets a hold of the request,
the data is already where
it was supposed to be.
So piece of cake, you're ready to go.
However,
you need to create the output stream.
So you have to come up and
create a Java output stream,
which might be to a file,
to another server, to a database,
whatever not.
It's up to you.
And the other nice thing about
this is you can have more than
one file upload on your form,
and it can be in any order.
You can have text boxes here,
file upload, more text boxes, buttons,
multiple submit, that sort of thing.
So if you really need a lot of control
about data that someone's uploading,
you might want to use input stream.
Now input stream is really fascinating
because you are sort of taking part into
the whole take values from requests.
You're really getting in, I'm sorry,
you're taking part in
processing the request.
You're getting in and handling
part of the take values section.
So what you do is you
set up this input stream,
and then you read from it.
WebObjects points the data at it,
you read from it,
and then you decide what to do with it.
Now this is really fascinating because
what you can do in either a component
or a direct action is you can get a
hold of this input stream and say,
hang on a second,
I want to make sure that nobody's
sending me up a copy of Oracle 8.
You get your request object,
then you get your
multi-part iterator object,
and you can ask it how many bytes
are remaining in your request.
And it'll tell you with
very close exactness,
and it's not exact,
about how much is left in your request.
So that's a great thing for people
I've talked about in the past of
having issues with someone mistakenly
uploading something really huge.
Other thing to remember with this is
that you can only use one file upload.
and you can't use multiple submit.
So you get more control
using input stream.
Maybe you don't want to
write anything in full.
Maybe you want to process the
data or send it to another server.
So you can do all these different
things with your input stream.
Now, one of the things I want to point
out is that you can use these as a
component action or component action,
as some people say,
or you can use them as a direct action.
Now, if you use a direct action
with an input stream,
you can use the WoW multipart iterator,
which is documented beautifully,
to go through, to basically do the take
values part yourself.
You get ahold of this
iterator and you say,
"Give me the next thing.
Give me the next thing." It'll hand
you all the form values and then
it'll hand you the file upload,
which you can stream off to somewhere,
and then you can continue going,
more form values, another file upload.
So that you should only
use with direct action.
That's the WoW multipart iterator.
Really great stuff.
So streaming responses.
Okay,
so if streaming requests weren't enough,
these guys decided to go ahead and
implement some streaming responses.
In the past, if you had a file to
download to the user,
for example, dynamically created graphic,
a JPEG or a PNG or a GIF or something,
what you would do is you would override
appended responses in your component.
You do set content on the response.
You set your content type,
and then you shuffle it off,
and you're done with it.
However, that means that, of course,
you have to have in memory the
entire thing that you're going
to stream down at the client.
With streaming responses,
you create an input stream,
you assign it to a WoW response
by using set content stream,
and you return the
response and you're done.
It's just that easy.
And your memory is going
to stay at a constant rate.
So that's it for the streaming
request and responses.
Again, thanks to Francois and
Carl for the hard work on that.
Got a couple topics,
and Kenny's going to come up
here and give a couple topics.
What I want to talk to you is about
something I've seen by looking at
various code bases over the years.
People have difficulty sometimes
creating reusable components because of,
they trip over what I call just
initialization of certain things.
And the crux of the problem comes
because you start creating pages,
and then later you may start
creating reusable components.
And even though they're the same thing,
and that they both inherit
from one component,
there are differences in how you interact
with them when you're creating them.
So with a page, you create it,
you set state into it,
and then you return it.
And with a reusable component
that appears on the page,
the system is doing the creation,
and bindings are the things
that are being pushed into it,
and you don't have
direct control over it.
So the question becomes,
when is it safe to initialize
supporting structures?
This is more than just
getting bindings here.
It's creating that list that's
driving a pop-up button.
It's filtering something,
a bunch of singletons,
just creating a bunch of stuff
basically one time only creation.
You don't want to necessarily
do it over and over again.
In creating these supporting
structures you may need bindings,
you may not.
It may involve going to the
database or it could be expensive.
So you only would want to redo it
unless it was absolutely necessary.
So I'm going to actually
give you a solution,
the one that I prefer,
the way I've approached this problem.
And that's just to
construct things lazily.
This is a pattern used
throughout WebObjects and EOF.
It's not just for performance.
It's something I found
simplifies this whole problem.
So basically the way it works is
it's an extension of a pattern
that Kenny talked about earlier.
A list of stuff.
If it's not there, create it.
And if it is there, just return it.
Now, you know,
why go to the trouble of having that
method with that type of a format when
there's a constructor laying around?
I just want to sort of go over some of
the things where I've seen people try
to do the same thing in different places
and some of the pitfalls with that.
So why not a constructor?
Well, one reason is when you're
in the constructor,
you don't actually have
access to the bindings.
So suppose you needed access to that,
then you couldn't put it there.
If you didn't need bindings,
you still would probably want to
do it in the thing I suggested
rather than this because you might
create objects unnecessarily.
You're in the constructor.
The page hasn't rendered at all yet.
It may turn out you don't need half
the things that are on the page,
that could be on the page
because they're being hidden
by conditionals or something.
And then another point there,
Another point there is,
what if you need to
change the list later?
There's issues there with cache and
validation since the constructor
is after all called only once.
The other thing is, well, OK, fine,
I'll put it in Awake,
but you still have some
of the same problems.
Again, bindings aren't available.
Probably the next best place
to try and put this sort of
thing is in AppendedResponse.
But again, you might create objects
unnecessarily because if you
put it in AppendedResponse,
you need to do this
before you call super.
So the reason-- well,
I guess I want to-- one more
thing to talk about here.
This is a workaround I've seen.
Just don't do this.
But anyway, this is something I've seen.
I just want to highlight it.
If you've seen it in your code,
maybe you should pull it out.
People want to use that
constructor really bad.
They want to put the
stuff in the constructor,
but they don't have access to bindings.
They just say, I know what I'll do.
I'll take this stuff and
I'll put it in the session,
and then I'll put these things
in the session in my page,
then I'll return my page,
and then the component
will construct itself.
It'll pull this stuff out of the session,
and hey, I don't got any problem.
I've avoided the whole deal with
not having access to bindings,
and my constructor's only called once.
And the downside to this is
I've got a more complex session.
It's less reusable because now
you've got all this external
coordination that's required.
The page that's returning this
thing has got to know something
about the components that are on
the page that you're returning.
And again,
you have some of the other limitations
I mentioned on the previous slide.
So to summarize the advantages
of lazy initialization,
instead of coordinating,
you let your reusable component
coordinate things itself.
Construction is deferred
until bindings are available.
That means the only time you would
ask for a list of states that are
populated in a pop-up button that
you fetch from a database would be
in either take values from request,
invoke action, or append a response.
And those are also the places
where bindings are available.
So that problem is kind of solved.
And if the list is never needed,
it's never created.
So this is one of those rare situations
where the thing that is good for
performance is also good for making
your code as simple as possible.
And the fourth point
there is a bit subtle.
You get easy cache invalidation.
Instead of you going,
every time you make a change,
explicitly changing something or
rebuilding it every request and
append a response or some other place,
all the change agent does,
the code that makes the affecting change,
all that code does is nulls
out an instance variable.
And if the new list is never needed,
it's never constructed.
And more importantly,
from a simplicity standpoint,
as long as consumers are
only asking for the accessor,
and they're never actually
asking for the instance variable,
then the consumer never worries
about what's going on underneath it.
So.
Getting to this next topic,
topic number two.
I call this thing the
mysterious take values failure.
I couldn't think of a better name for it,
and I even kind of got
criticized for this,
but maybe someone will
give me a better name.
Anyway,
let me just summarize the problem here.
Some but not all the changes are missing.
You fill out some stuff on the page,
you submit the page,
and some stuff in this
text field shows up,
and this checkbox shows up,
but these other things aren't there.
Okay, that's weird.
Number two,
on occasion you see exceptions thrown
in the take values from request process.
Writing take values from request,
your code isn't even called,
and you're like,
is this bugging WebObjects?
What's going on?
And then the third point there is,
and this is the kicker,
you've noticed that you've rearranged
elements maybe sheerly by accident,
and the problem goes away.
So like...
What's going on?
To illustrate what's going on,
let me give you a more concrete example.
Let's assume a very simple page.
You've got a checkbox,
you've got a conditional,
and inside that conditional
is a text field.
And it turns out that the setting
in the checkbox controls whether
or not the text field is visible.
So it's checked.
The user sees the checked
checkbox and they uncheck it.
And they type some
stuff in the text field.
They hit submit, and what happens on the
server is the server extracts
that value from the checkbox.
And as far as the server is concerned,
the text field doesn't exist anymore.
It's hidden.
The user sees it in the browser,
but as far as the server is concerned,
that thing's gone.
So it's not going to ask for the value.
The value is in the request.
Everything went over OK.
Everything was fine on the browser.
It's just that the page just
at the very last minute went,
no, I'm not going to pull that.
So the solution to this would
be rearranging the page.
You might just-- if you put the checkbox
after the text field in this example,
then it would in fact get the
value in the text field and
the value in the checkbox.
And to summarize the basic condition
of the problem is if you are doing
things and take values from request,
if the user is submitting changes
which change the structure of the page,
you could be headed for this problem.
So there's two solutions to this.
There's the brittle solution, which is,
well, I don't have a lot of time,
so I'm just going to take the checkbox
and I'm going to move it down here.
Done.
I'm going skiing.
I'm going to do this.
I'm going to
But it's going to get chewed out on
Monday when the design people rearrange
the page and everything looks better
to them and your app doesn't work.
Or worse,
someone did this in design and they
didn't even bother sending it through
QA because they didn't change any code,
so hey, there's no big problem.
And these exceptions are flying
all over the place and you've
got to come home from Tahoe.
So that's no fun.
So what I suggest you guys do is if you
have things like the checkbox example,
take that state,
put it in a holding variable,
and take values from request in your
reusable component before you call super,
extract from the holding variable
and put it in the ultimate storage.
That way if you're retrofitting
this back onto an app that
may have more than one action,
you put the change in one place
and all the rest of your code on
the page doesn't have to change.
If you only have one action,
then it's okay to put this kind
of thing in the action method
if that's more convenient.
Getting on to the next topic is Kenny.
So the next topic is
obtaining values from objects.
It seems deceptively simple.
Why am I even talking about it?
Typically you run into this when
you have a component that displays
a list of objects or takes an
array of objects for a binding,
so it's trying to display a list,
a custom pop-up button or a table
component or something like that.
And the problem arises, I think,
because people try to encapsulate too
much into their reusable component.
The whole idea is for
it to be functional,
so they try to insulate the consumer
from the innards as much as possible.
So what beginners typically do is they
have a binding for the array of objects,
and then they have a key binding,
which they take in,
and then as the component
-- as the reusable component
iterates over the list,
they call value for key on the
object to get a value to display.
As it turns out,
this isn't very flexible.
It's better to make the consumer
provide the item and display
string binding instead of a key.
The advantages being the objects being
displayed then don't have to actually
respond to key value coding because
you're not calling value for key into it.
WebObjects has another neat trick to do
key value coding on objects that don't
actually respond to key value coding.
And also the parent is free to use
custom methods to generate the value.
So if you want to derive some value
off an attribute of the object
that's not already in the object,
this gives you a lot more flexibility.
Let's take a look at an example here
of the not-so-flexible situation.
So we have the list binding
and the display key binding in
the parent where you use it.
In the reusable component,
we're repeating over a label.
And in the WAD of the reusable component,
we have value equals display string
for the string we want to display,
and we're doing value for key
here in the reusable components
The more flexible version is we
make the consumer provide an item,
an item binding,
and now the display string,
instead of being a constant,
it says display string,
so bind to my method display string.
And the HTML stays the same.
The important thing here is the WAD.
You see that item,
the item binding in the
repetition is now caret item,
which means it's pushing that
item back up into the consumer
every time during the repetition.
And the display string is
also caret display string,
which means instead of using my
method to get the display string,
use my binding value of display string.
And in the parent here,
you see it's returning the name
bracketed by square brackets,
so a little example of derived value.
Now, if you didn't want to have a custom
value for the display string,
you can just here in the parent's WAD,
you can say display string equals
item.name instead of display string,
and you can get rid of the display
string method in the parent altogether.
It makes things lighter
weight for everybody.
The next tip is using
WoW component content in tables.
It's kind of an extension of
the same mentality as before.
People tend to, when they write their
first table component,
have dual repetition inside
their table component.
And they repeat all the cells
within their reusable component.
Then what ends up happening is, well,
they want this column to
be left justified and this
column to be right justified,
so they add a justification binding.
And then they want one to have bold font,
so they add a font binding.
And then they want another one
to have a larger font size,
so they have a size binding.
And it eventually gets to where... you
have an infinite number of bindings
to try to configure your table,
and it's still not as
flexible as you want it to be.
So the solution is to put more
work onto the consumer and have the
consumer provide the table cells
themselves in WoW component content.
And this allows the
parent to do anything.
You can put images in your cells,
hyperlinks.
You can make multi-line cells,
colored cell backgrounds,
whatever it is you want.
So taking an example -- or taking a
look at the not-so-flexible version.
Whoops.
We see here that the list is passed into
the reusable component and the parent,
passing in headers, display keys,
display align, display style,
and then the reusable component
has the dual repetitions,
the row repetition and the column
repetition with the TD tags
and the TR tags being repeated.
In the more flexible version,
We see that now the parent
has a lot more stuff in it.
In the HTML,
it now is bolding the first column
and centering the second column and
right aligning the third column.
And we have a finite list of bindings.
And the table,
the reusable component now just contains
the TR tags but not the TD tags.
And this example is a little bit broken,
forgot the wool repetition tags.
But it maintains control of the
TR tags so it can still do things
like alternate row colors and
highlight a row for a selected row.
Okay, that brings us to the Dr.
Evil segment.
You know, sometimes there are some
techniques that are so handy
that you just have to use them,
even though you know you're
going to go to hell for doing it.
So the first one is the parent talking
directly to the reusable component.
I said before that the child is
totally in control of communicating
with the parent via bindings.
Of course, as in all things,
that's not quite true.
What we can do is at the beginning of
a Pender response we can do set value
for binding this to a binding value.
Now, then whatever the parent has bound
to that binding value takes on
the value of the subcomponent,
then the parent can start
talking to the subcomponent.
You might want to use this in cases where
no number of bindings is flexible enough.
You just need to be able to
talk directly to the object.
And it's important to note that the
value is not available until the
child starts generating its response.
So you may want to do your
communication like inside a set
method or something like that,
or after the child
starts a Pender response,
it may get a binding which will
signal to the parent that it can
start now talking to the child.
As a fallout of this,
you can do something that's
also otherwise impossible.
Allow two sibling components
to communicate on the page.
If -- as the page is
generating its response,
the first sibling will
push itself into a binding.
Some other component further down
the page can pull the binding and
suddenly you have two siblings
talking directly to each other.
Be careful when doing this.
The next topic is array bindings.
A lot of times you have a lot
of bindings that are just simply
arrays of string constants.
And you don't want to write a whole
bunch of little bits of tedious
code to create arrays of string
constants because the syntax in
Java is almost as bad as it is in C.
So what we can do is
just use a little trick,
use a method called -- we can
call it array binding named.
And it just checks a binding to
see if it's of the type NSArray.
It just passes it on through.
And if it's a string,
then it just assumes it's
a comma-separated list and
uses components separated by
string to pass an array back.
And now I'm going to bring Dave and
Fitz up and -- And we're going
to talk about the rest of these.
Okay,
one more thing and then we'll get on
to just kind of go into the examples a
little bit and this will be the close
of the formal part of this sucker.
I want to talk about smart bindings.
This is just a name I'm
going to come up with.
I'm really bad at naming things,
so anyway.
I want to address a situation
that you may or may not have.
I've run into this situation where I've
had hundreds of stuff on the page and
I just need to do some trivial thing.
I wanted to like hell to stick
it in the declaration file,
but we don't do that
in declaration files,
so you end up having a whole bunch of
trivial methods to do that sort of thing.
The kind of thing I'm talking about
is like an example we'll see up there.
You might have a path.
You might want to append
something to the front.
You might have a lot of low
strings and you might end up
having the same basic method,
but it takes a lot of time.
You might have a lot of arguments and you
have like a gazillion different constant
arguments you need to pass to it.
Now, the solutions to this type of
miniature problem is you can create
a little component that performs
the intervention and then you're
not adding code to your page,
but now instead of having a low string,
you've got your special trivial
string that you've got everywhere.
That's kind of unsatisfying.
The alternative is dozens
of trivial methods,
but there's one other alternative
called the smart binding.
To illustrate what that means
is I want to give you an example
from something I had to deal with.
I had this page and it had
a customer's order history.
And therefore there were an
enormous amount of totals,
money totals on the page.
And I ended up having to have literally
hundreds of methods like those up there.
Order detail subtotal, blah, blah, blah.
And all these guys did was turn around
and do value for key path on the page,
got the value, and then they did some
currency conversion on it.
And so what I was able to do is I was
able to do some key value for key path.
This is the way that all the key
value coding happens from your
component into everything else.
You might override it and
do certain special stuff.
Like in this case,
it looks for native currency and
the at sign inside the key path.
And if it finds it,
it does some special processing.
Now, there's a version of this
kind of taken to its logical,
you know, logic,
but it's a little bit different.
This is an obnoxious
extreme called Woe OG&L.
I believe it's part of a certain project.
But anyway, even if you don't go all,
you know, use that technique,
this can be quite useful.
Imagine sticking something like this
and a lot of similar things in an
abstract component that is just used,
you know,
throughout the application and then,
you know, you've done away with
lines and lines of code,
trivial code.
Okay, so now if Kenny is going
to hell for what he did,
I'm sure I'm going to be submitted
to something much worse like having
to write VB code for the rest of
my life or something for this one.
This is sort of just like plant
a seed in your head about some of
the things you can do to really
abuse the WebObjects framework.
WebObjects components,
the dynamic elements that
ship with WebObjects,
really know how to display themselves.
You can do, like WoeString,
it can display a string.
WoeHyperlink knows how to display a
hyperlink and how to provide a link and
all the jazz that gets you to another
action in your WebObjects application.
You can actually develop
your own components that sort
of subclass Woe components.
So, for example,
up here in the screen we have WoeString.
You can make MyString or MyRepetition
or MyImage and that sort of thing.
And here's an example.
You can make these components so that
they know how to edit themselves.
So if you take a reusable component,
say MyString, for example,
and you set it up in a little conditional
so that if it's in display mode,
it'll display itself just like
you would see when a user's
looking at your page in your app.
But edit mode would allow the
user to maybe edit the binding,
the component,
change the content of whatnot.
And finally,
you could even... You have another
mode that would write itself to disk
so that it would know what to do.
You say, write yourself to disk.
And it's MyImage.
And it would point to the image
that someone had configured
it to point at in edit mode.
Okay?
So that's... And last but not least,
and this is what I did,
is I created this whole
tree of components.
So each one had MyString, MyImage,
et cetera.
And I linked them together.
And if you add a little
pop-up of other components,
you can sort of allow the
user in edit mode to add more
components and add a repetition.
And then add other things
with HTML around it.
And what you're essentially doing
at this point is creating WebObjects
components in a page on the fly.
And then archive them all in XML,
stick them in the database.
And you can pull it out and edit it again
at some point right on an HTML page.
The example that I'm using here is
I created an application that basically
allowed people to create websites.
So it's really on the border
of abusing WebObjects,
I'd say.
But, you know,
it's one of the things that you can do.
So, Ken, we've got a little bit of
time to look at some examples.
You've already seen some of mine,
so I want you guys to show one of yours.
Got a couple examples here
of the table component here.
Oh, look at that.
So this is an example of a table
component that uses WOL component
content for its columns.
And as you can see,
it's got row highlighting,
but you can still have images
and bold or anything you want.
This is actually showing -- I'm sure
you're familiar with the movie database.
So it's actually, you know,
able to show a too-many
relationship here.
Let's see, where are we here?
Oh, here we go.
Where we have more than one item
across too-many relationship,
and we've got multiple rows going on.
and another one is an EO validation
framework where the validation
messages that EOF spits out aren't
the easiest to show in your UI,
but this is a high commitment framework
that involves a lot more other objects
and makes you commit to using like
a subclass of EO editing context
in order to do this kind of stuff.
But you can make error messages
that show up right beside the
fields that are being entered,
and these are actually bubbled
up from the EOs themselves.
I've got a couple of simple little
reusable components here that are just
more of examples of little widgets
or whatnot you could come up with.
I don't know if Steve Heyman's here,
but this is one I got from him,
which is really a lot of fun.
SQL Logging.
So you could turn that on and
off with this little widget.
Sort of a helper to
help your programming.
So you notice it's currently true,
and if you look up there,
you'll see that we printed out
a little bit of SQL debug stuff.
And turn it to false,
and all you see is false.
So it's something you could drop in,
have it show up only in development mode,
and that sort of thing.
So an example of a helpful widget.
And also a reminder that sometimes it's
useful to develop little tools to help
yourself in developing an application.
This is a great one
I got from David Black,
who works in my group here,
which is a reusable calendar component,
which I've made really big,
and now I'm showing it
on a really small screen.
This is a great example
of loose bindings.
He's got about a million different
bindings for this calendar component,
but all you're required to do is bind it.
So you can bind in an entity and say,
hey, this particular attribute
is a date field.
And in this example,
I've selected August 1999 in the
movies database because it has two
separate movies occurring in that month.
And you can tie actions,
which I haven't done,
to the movies themselves,
or the objects themselves.
So you can go look at them or get
further information from them.
And you can tie an action to the date
and go do further stuff with that.
And one last quick little
reasonable widget I'll point
up here is not this one.
It's this one.
It's a button widget.
When you're writing a create, read,
update, delete type application,
when you're doing a lot
of dealing with data,
that type of stuff,
you find yourself putting the
same four buttons in a page or
maybe three buttons or one button.
So what we did is we created this button
bar that when you look at it in HTML,
it looks just like the
top one right there.
It's like all these different buttons.
And then you just bind action methods
from your parent component into that,
and then it'll go ahead and show it.
So below that,
you see we only bound cancel and save.
And those went ahead and
only showed those buttons.
But it's the same exact component
that shows the price on that screen.
I think we're over now,
so I think that's it.
Yeah.
I forgot to mention Project Wonder.
One more thing.
We forgot to mention Project Wonder.
If you're not familiar with it and
you're doing WebObjects programming,
you should get yourself to a web browser
as soon as possible and check out the
reusable components that these guys have
implemented from low commitment to high
commitment stuff and the woe OGNL stuff.
And the frameworks, a lot of the stuff.